Adds the article "CI/CD comparison Vs Kestra" (#1773)
kestra-io/docs: content/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison.md

---
title: "Kestra vs. Popular CI/CD Tools: When to Choose an Orchestration Solution"
description: "Learn when to to choose an orchestrator rather than a CI/CD solution"
date: xxxxxxx
category: Solutions
author:
  name: Federico Trotta
  image: "ftrotta"
image: /blogs/xxxxx.jpg
---

> In a recent [blog](./2024-09-18-what-is-an-orchestrator.md), we've defined what an orchestrator is, what are the differences between orchestration and automation, and how orchestration can help you to automate your workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a recent [blog](./2024-09-18-what-is-an-orchestrator.md), we defined what an orchestrator is, what the differences between orchestration and automation, and how orchestration can help you to automate your workflows.

```

> Now, it's time to answer the question: when should you choose an orchestrator over a CI/CD solution?

Reviewer: Use this page to help emphasise the selling points on Kestra https://kestra.io/use-cases/platform-engineers

Author: ![use-cases-platform-engineers](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/18558f6f-7580-469d-8ead-55c5c979eddf)
This is also broken @wrussell1999 :)

Reviewer: All the use case pages should be fixed now!

> In this article, we'll compare Kestra to popular CI/CD solutions to help you get a practical understanding of when to choose an orchestrator over a CI/CD tool. In particular, at the end of the article, we'll provide a deep comparison between Kestra and Jenkins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we'll compare Kestra to popular CI/CD solutions to help you get a practical understanding of when to choose an orchestrator over a CI/CD tool. In particular, we'll provide a deep comparison between Kestra and Jenkins.

```

> Ready? Let's dive in!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Comparing Kestra to CI/CD Tools

Reviewer: I'd maybe add CircleCI to this list as that's very popular too

> As we've already clarified the difference between orchestration and automation in the above-mentioned blog, let’s directly dive into how Kestra stacks up against popular CI/CD tools. 

Reviewer: Removing as duplicate
```suggestion
```

> ### Kestra Vs. GitHub Actions

Reviewer: The main thing that I would point out for GH Actions is that to test if your Action is setup correctly, you need to commit it to your GitHub repository which can be annoying and slow, as well as mess up your commit history.

Kestra makes that easier with the built in editor where you can tweak something and execute straight away. Can you add something about this too?

[GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) is the go-to for many developers because it’s embedded right into GitHub, making it super convenient for CI/CD as it allows to build, test, and deploy code right from GitHub: basically, anything developers needs to do in their day-to-day work.

It is also developer-friendly, easy to set up, and integrates well with your codebase. 

![A use of GitHub Actions by Federico Trotta](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/github_actions.png)

> But where it excels in simplicity, it lacks in handling workflows that need to span across multiple systems, such as deploying applications on various platforms like AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud Platform (GCP), and this is where Kestra shines.

Reviewer: This isn't correct. You can deploy onto all of these could platforms directly from GitHub Actions with Actions in the marketplace.

https://github.com/google-github-actions
https://azure.github.io/actions/
https://github.com/aws-actions

> In fact, if your workflow goes beyond just automating builds and deployments  — let’s say you need to automate data processing tasks across cloud services — here's where Kestra’s orchestration capabilities really shine. Kestra, in fact, can handle more complex workflows with dependencies between services, and it also provides mechanisms for error handling and managing events - even [in real time](./2024-06-27-realtime-triggers.md).

Reviewer: This is really vague so hard for the reader to understand. Can you give a proper example where this might not work on GitHub Actions but does work on Kestra. Or maybe works on both, but is easier with Kestra.

Note: we don't need to just point out things the alternatives don't do, focus on what we do better / easier.

Although GitLab CI/CD is more suited for teams needing advanced pipeline capabilities and integrated DevOps tooling than GitHub Actions, it basically has the same weakness as GitHub Actions when the game becomes harder.

In fact, when you need something that can handle orchestration across multiple environments, or when workflows involve more than just code deployments, Kestra’s orchestration integrations take over.

For example: do you need to coordinate a workflow that involves running processes across different cloud providers or managing task dependencies in a data pipeline? That’s where Kestra outperforms GitLab CI/CD which is great for automating code deployments, but Kestra is designed to manage more intricate workflows that involve different systems and cloud environments.

### Kestra Vs. Azure DevOps
Azure DevOps is another heavy hitter for CI/CD, particularly if you’re in the Microsoft ecosystem. It’s a fully integrated toolchain that works well for automating pipelines, managing repos, and monitoring applications. 

![Azure DevOps workflow by Federico Trotta](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/azure_devops.png)

> But again, its core strength lies in CI/CD, not in orchestrating workflows across multiple systems or environments.

Reviewer: It would be good if each example wasn't just a repeat of this. Can you do some more digging to highlight specifics. Use existing comparisons of these tools to help get you started.

For example, let’s say you’re managing a workflow that includes tasks across multiple cloud providers, and Azure is just one part of the puzzle. Maybe you’re also pulling in data from AWS or triggering workflows based on events in GCP (Google Cloud Platform). In this case, Kestra allows you to orchestrate these tasks in a single workflow, regardless of which system is involved. 

So, while Azure DevOps is great for Microsoft-centric pipelines, Kestra offers the flexibility to handle distributed, cross-cloud workflows with ease.

> ### Kestra vs. Jenkins

Reviewer: I'd say the main thing Kestra does well here is the simple interface with good autocomplete and error handling to make building your system quick. I use to work with Jenkins and it was a very slow and tedious process to get setup in comparison.

> Ah, [Jenkins](https://www.jenkins.io/) — the old reliable. It has been around forever, and it has a [massive ecosystem of plugins](https://plugins.jenkins.io/) to automate almost anything. You can pretty much build anything with Jenkins, but here’s the rub: you’ll need to do a lot of that building yourself, as it requires a lot of configuration; and if you’re managing complex workflows, you’ll likely end up with custom scripts and a mess of plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ah, [Jenkins](https://www.jenkins.io/) — the old reliable. It has been around forever, and it has a [massive ecosystem of plugins](https://plugins.jenkins.io/) to automate almost anything. You can pretty much build anything with Jenkins, but here’s the catch: you’ll need to do a lot of that building yourself, as it requires a lot of configuration; and if you’re managing complex workflows, you’ll likely end up with custom scripts and a mess of plugins.

```

![A use of Jenkins by Federico Trotta](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/jenkins.png)

> So, Jenkins can automate simple tasks like nobody’s business, but Kestra is all about scaling those workflows across systems with less hassle. With Kestra,  in fact, you’re not diving into custom scripting to handle error states or retries—it’s built-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, Jenkins can automate simple tasks like nobody’s business, but Kestra is all about scaling those workflows across systems with less hassle. With Kestra, in fact, you’re not diving into custom scripting to handle error states or retries—it’s built-in.

```

So, if your workload involves tasks that involve cloud services, need precise error handling, or have complex dependencies, Kestra handles all that for you out of the box without the plugin bloat or script maintenance headaches as Jenkins would.

## Key Features that Make Kestra Stand Out
By now, you’re surely seeing the pattern: the tools we mentioned are great for CI/CD and managing simple workflows, while Kestra is purpose-built for orchestrating complex workflows across different systems. So, basically, if you're working on the GitHub environment and need a CI solution, you'll use GitHub Actions, and the same thing applies if you're in the GitLab ecosystem.

But what if you need to manage workflows across multiple environments? Here's where Kestra comes into the game!

> So, let’s zero in on a few of Kestra’s key features that make it stand out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, let’s zoom in on a few of Kestra’s key features that make it stand out:

```

- **Tasks Orchestration**: Kestra’s primary strength is in orchestrating tasks across multiple environments. It doesn’t matter if those tasks are happening on different cloud providers, on-prem servers, or in a hybrid environment: Kestra manages the flow of tasks smoothly. For example: CI/CD tools can kick off a build or deploy code, but Kestra can handle workflows that include those steps plus data processing tasks, external API calls, or anything else your workflow requires.

![Workflow orchestration in Kestra](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/kestra_orchestration.jpg)

- **Error Handling and Retries**: In traditional automation tools, error handling and retries often require custom scripting. Kestra, instead, bakes this into its core. In fact, if a task fails, Kestra can automatically retry it, adjust workflows dynamically, or trigger error-specific branches in the workflow. This is a huge time-saver when working with workflows prone to errors, like distributed systems or long-running data processing jobs.

> ![Managing errors in Kestra](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/kestra_errors.jpg)

Reviewer: Can you use a different image over a thumbnail. Confusing as these look like the video. If you mean to put the video, then put that. I can make a similar image to the thumbnail if that's what you're after

- **Cloud-Native and Distributed Systems Support**: Kestra was built with modern [cloud-native](./2022-06-21-light-architecture.md) and distributed systems in mind. So, whether you’re orchestrating workflows across AWS, GCP, Azure, or on-prem services, Kestra can handle it all, as it’s designed on purpose to manage tasks that live in various environments without extra configuration or complexity.

![Plugins for Kestra](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/kestra_plugins.jpg)

- **Event-Driven Architecture**: A lot of modern workflows are event-driven, and Kestra really shines here. You can trigger workflows based on events happening across your stack, whether that’s a file being uploaded, a database change, or an API call: this makes Kestra super flexible for managing real-time and batch workflows alike.

![Real time triggers in Kestra](/blogs/2024-06-27-realtime-triggers.jpg)

- **Visual Workflow Editor**: While CI/CD tools often require you to dive into script configurations, Kestra offers a visual workflow editor. In fact, you can build and manage your workflows in a more intuitive, visual way, reducing the cognitive load of managing complex systems.

> ![Workflows in Kestra](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/kestra_flows.jpg)

Reviewer: Can you use a different image over a thumbnail. Confusing as these look like the video. If you mean to put the video, then put that. I can make a similar image to the thumbnail if that's what you're after

Now it's time to get a practical example. To do so, we'll compare Kestra to Jenkins, and we'll:
- Describe why developers use Jenkins.
- Difficulties that developers encounter in using Jenkins and how Kestra can solve them.

Let's start!

### Why Developers Use Jenkins
Jenkins has many pros, and we believe the three that are woth mentioning are:

1. **Wide Adoption and Ecosystem**: Jenkins has been around for over a decade, so it is mature and "battle-tested": this makes it a staple in continuous integration and deployment. Also, its vast plugin ecosystem and open-source nature make it adaptable for almost any CI/CD pipeline need.

2. **Flexibility**: With Jenkins, developers can create highly customized pipelines as it supports different environments, tools, and languages.

3. **Community Support**: Jenkins has an active community that ensures there’s a large amount of documentation, tutorials, and forums where developers can find answers to their problems.

Now, let's see where Jenkins falls short.

### Difficulties Developers Encounter Using Jenkins
While Jenkins is a powerful tool, it does come with some challenges.

Let's see them together.

#### Plugin Overload

> Jenkins currently has over 1,900 plugins, and this creates complexity as they can conflict with each other. Also, updating them can break pipelines, causing downtime.

Reviewer: Same could be said for any tool with updates. What does Kestra do to help mitigate this?

How do they conflict with each other?

Kestra, on the other hand, offers built-in integrations for many common use cases without the need for plugins, and this reduces the risk of compatibility issues. For exampple, in Kestra a CI/CD pipeline can be defined in a YAML configuration, and all the components work seamlessly together.

#### Groovy Syntax

> Jenkins uses [Groovy-based](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/pipeline/steps/groovy/) scripting for pipeline creation, which can be unintuitive for developers unfamiliar with it - as it also a language now widely used. This can create a steep learning curve that can slow down development and cause errors.

Reviewer: > which can be unintuitive for developers unfamiliar with it - as it also a language now widely used.

This sentence doesn't make sense. This is implying it's quite niche so people don't know it, but it's widely used so it's not niche? Can you expand this.

Author: Oh...yes...this is a typo. It should be 'not' instead of 'now' -> which can be unintuitive for developers unfamiliar with it - it is also a language not widely used.

> Kestra, instead, uses a declarative YAML-based syntax that is much easier to read and write. So, instead of writing custom Groovy scripts, developers can define conditions, steps, and exceptions directly in YAML: this lowers the learning curve and reduces the chance of errors.

Reviewer: worth highlighting that YAML is very human readable

> For example, here's how you can implement a [condition](https://kestra.io/plugins/core/conditions/io.kestra.plugin.core.condition.expressioncondition) that will return false for a missing variable:

Reviewer: This is very niche - conditions aren't a regular building block. Mostly used with triggers. Can you either change this to a task example, something every flow will need or find an equivalent in Jenkins to compare to. Hard to gauge how this is better without a Groovy example.

This example downloads a CSV for example.
```yaml
tasks:
  - id: fetch_data
    type: io.kestra.plugin.core.http.Download
    uri: https://huggingface.co/datasets/kestra/datasets/raw/main/csv/orders.csv
```

```yaml
- conditions:
    - type: io.kestra.plugin.core.condition.ExpressionCondition
      expression: {{ unknown is defined }}
```

#### Debugging and Troubleshooting
In Jenkins, debugging pipelines can be difficult as logs can become scattered across different plugins and stages, making it hard to trace the root cause of an issue.

Kestra, instead, provides centralized logging and error-handling across all tasks in a workflow. If a pipeline fails, developers can easily view the entire execution history and debug issues with a unified logging system. 

![An error in Kestra](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/error.png)

#### Scalability Challenges
Jenkins requires a lot of manual setup for distributed builds or scaling across [multiple nodes](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/nodes/), and this can lead to bottlenecks when the infrastructure needs to grow.

> Instead, as Kestra is designed for distributed, cloud-native workflows it automatically handles scaling and parallelism without the need to manually configure nodes. Developers can define [parallel tasks](https://kestra.io/plugins/core/tasks/flows/io.kestra.plugin.core.flow.parallel) directly in their workflows, and Kestra manages the execution across distributed resources in the YAML just like so:

Reviewer: this is a good opportunity to talk about Worker Groups and Task Runners about splitting workloads across different nodes / runners. The parallel task is different to the Jenkins example you used

```yaml
id: parallel
namespace: company.team

tasks:
  - id: parallel
    type: io.kestra.plugin.core.flow.Parallel
    tasks:
      - id: 1st
        type: io.kestra.plugin.core.debug.Return
        format: "{{ task.id }} > {{ taskrun.startDate }}"
      - id: 2nd
        type: io.kestra.plugin.core.debug.Return
        format: "{{ task.id }} > {{ taskrun.id }}"
  - id: last
    type: io.kestra.plugin.core.debug.Return
    format: "{{ task.id }} > {{ taskrun.startDate }}"

```

## Conclusions

> In conclusion, choosing between Kestra and CI/CD tools depends on your specific requirements.

Reviewer: It would be good to give a summary of which platform excels at and why Kestra works best for most use cases.

Anna does this well for Airflow here: https://kestra.io/blogs/data-orchestration-beyond-analytics

### GitHub Actions
[GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) is GitHub's integrated CI/CD solution, allowing you to automate your workflows directly from your GitHub repository. It enables you to build, test, and deploy your code right alongside your pull requests and issues, providing a seamless experience for developers.

Also, by integrating tightly with GitHub, it reduces context switching, allowing teams to manage their entire CI/CD pipelines within a single interface; this makes GitHub Actions particularly attractive for teams that want to quickly implement automation without having to leave their existing GitHub environment.

![A use of GitHub Actions by Federico Trotta](/blogs/YYYY-MM-DD-CI-CD-kestra-comparison/github_actions.png)

**Unique feature: deep integration with the GitHub ecosystem**
GitHub Actions offers seamless integration with the entire GitHub platform, letting you trigger workflows based on any GitHub event—like pull requests, issues, or comments. This makes it an excellent choice for projects already using GitHub, as it provides a highly streamlined experience.

**Pros**:

> - **Ease of use**:Simple setup within your GitHub repository, which means minimal configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Ease of use**: Simple setup within your GitHub repository, which means minimal configuration.

```

> - **Marketplace for actions**: Access to a vast library of pre-built actions, which can save you a lot of time..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Marketplace for Actions**: Access to a vast library of pre-built actions, which can save you a lot of time..

```

- **Cost-effective**: Generous free tier for public repositories, making it accessible for open-source projects.

**Cons**:

> - **Limited to gitHub**: Ideal for projects fully hosted on GitHub, but the limited integration with other platforms can make it challenging for teams managing repositories across multiple environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Limited to GitHub**: Ideal for projects fully hosted on GitHub, but the limited integration with other platforms can make it challenging for teams managing repositories across multiple environments.

```

> - **Debugging challenges**: Requires commits to test workflows, which can clutter the commit history and make it harder to maintain a clean repository.

Reviewer: Technically you can trigger them in the Actions page. It's more that to edit your workflow, you also have to commit to the repository. Annoying because now your commit history has a combination of your "business logic" (or codebase for this article) and "orchestration" (or CI/CD for this article) logic combined together
